Modify rule S3590: LaYC format (#2968)
SonarSource/rspec: rules/S3590/cfamily/rule.adoc

Explicitly releasing non-heap memory leads to undefined behavior.

== Why is this an issue?

The `free` function and `delete` operator are used exclusively to release dynamically allocated memory.
Attempting to release any other type of memory is _undefined behavior_.

> This rule raises an issue when trying to release pointers to non-heap memory, such as:

Reviewer: Please try to rephrase this a bit. I wouldn't explicitly mention that the "rule raises" since the rule has already been raised if a developer reads this. (The following list is really nice, it's just about the phrasing.)

Author: Reprashed

* Stack allocated memory - local variables or memory allocated with the `alloca`, `_alloca`, `_malloca` and `__builtin_alloca` functions.

> * Program executable code - function pointers.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Executable program code - function pointers.
```

* Program data - global and static variables.
* Read-only program data - constants and strings.

> 

Reviewer: We also need the `What is the potential impact` section in between.

Author: Was oscillating with this one:
* While yes, I believe that UB impact >> crash impact, I did not find any documented case of UB that does not act as a crash in the case of non-owned memory free, so most of the times the user will encounter a crash.
* While not stated in the rule, at least a sentence in the "...potential impact" specifying crashes is a good thing to add.

TL;DR will add a short section -> almost all UB in this case is a crash.

Reviewer: Please also align with the definition of UB that we now use in many rules. You can find an example in the description of rule `S3588`, for instance.
```
When a program comprises undefined behavior, the compiler no longer needs to adhere to the language standard, and the program has no meaning assigned to it.
The application might just crash, but in the worst case, the application may appear to execute correctly, while losing data or producing incorrect results.
```
This should be part of the `What is the potential impact` section.

Author: Then should we start putting this into a new `shared_content/cfamily/potential_impact_undefined_behavior.adoc`?

Reviewer: Ideally, yes. However, many rules have slightly adjusted this baseline explanation of UB. So in practice, we cannot really share this.

== How to fix it

> Remove any calls to `free` or `delete` that release non-heap memory.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Remove any calls to `free` or `delete` that aim at releasing non-heap memory.
```

> As a best practice, do not use the same pointer variable to point to heap memory and any other type of memory at different points in the program.

Reviewer: Please provide a more elaborate description of what you mean here and also give a code example, and then put it in the `Going the extra mile` subsection that follows the `Code examples` subsection.

Author: I was thinking this is a bit of a stretch, but I have seen this happen, I'm sure it makes sense to us but I will add an example to be thorough

Author: Edit: I cannot decide whether this is a 'pitfall' or a 'going the extra mile'. Will add it to 'going...' for now, tell me after the re-review if it fits better in 'pitfalls'

=== Code examples

Stack allocated memory:

==== Noncompliant code example

[source,cpp,diff-type=noncompliant,diff-id=1]
----
void fun(int size) {
  int number = 0;
  char* name = (char*)alloca(size);
  // ...

>   delete &number; // Noncompliant, memory allocated on the stack.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  delete &number; // Noncompliant: memory is stack-allocated.
```

>   free(name); // Noncompliant, memory allocated on the stack.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  free(name); // Noncompliant: memory is stack-allocated.
```

}
----

==== Compliant solution

[source,cpp,diff-type=compliant,diff-id=1]
----
void fun(int size) {
  int number = 0;
  char* name = (char*)alloca(size);

>   // ...

Reviewer: At a comment at the end of this function like `Compliant: stack memory is automatically released once the variables go out of scope` or something along those lines.

Author: I would use something a bit more generic, since the example also contains `alloca`

Reviewer: Sounds good to me, too.

}
----

Program executable code:

==== Noncompliant code example

[source,cpp,diff-type=noncompliant,diff-id=2]
----

> int get10() {

Reviewer: ```suggestion
int getValue() {
```

  return 10;
}

void fun() {
  // ...

>   free((void*) &get10); // Noncompliant, memory part of program executable code.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  free((void*) &getValue); // Noncompliant: memory is part of executable code.
```

}
----

==== Compliant solution

[source,cpp,diff-type=compliant,diff-id=2]
----

> int get10() {

Reviewer: Adjust accordingly and also at some sort of `Compliant:` comment.

Author: Added

  return 10;
}

void fun() {
  // ...
}
----

Program data:

==== Noncompliant code example

[source,cpp,diff-type=noncompliant,diff-id=3]
----
struct S {
  static inline int data = 64;
};

void fun() {
  static int x = 8;
  // ...

>   free(&x); // Noncompliant, memory part of program data.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  free(&x); // Noncompliant: memory part of the program's data.
```

>   free(&S::data); // Noncompliant, memory part of program data.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  free(&S::data); // Noncompliant: memory part of the program's data.
```

}
----

==== Compliant solution

[source,cpp,diff-type=compliant,diff-id=3]
----
struct S {
  static inline int data = 64;
};

> void fun() {

Reviewer: Add a `Compliant:` comment and state that global data does not need to be manually freed.

Author: Added

  static int x = 8;
  // ...
}
----

Read-only program data:

==== Noncompliant code example

[source,cpp,diff-type=noncompliant,diff-id=4]
----
int const limit = 128;

void fun() {
  char* name = "string";
  // ...

>   free((void*)&limit); // Noncompliant, memory part of read-only program data.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  free((void*)&limit); // Noncompliant: memory part of program's read-only data.
```

>   free(name); // Noncompliant, memory part of read-only program data.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  free(name); // Noncompliant: memory part of read-only program data.
```

>   free(name); // Noncompliant, memory part of read-only program data.

Reviewer: `Name` is a stack variable here.

Author: while it is a stack variable, the string data is supposed to be located in `.rodata` in most implementations, I believe.
I will check on godbolt

Reviewer: You're right, of course. The actual string is likely part of the program's `.rodata`.

Explicitly releasing non-heap memory leads to undefined behavior.

== Why is this an issue?

The `free` function and `delete` operator are used exclusively to release dynamically allocated memory.
Attempting to release any other type of memory is _undefined behavior_.

> The following non-heap memory types should not be released:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The following non-heap memory types may not be released:
```
Makes it a bit stronger than `should` in this context.

Author: I believe `must` is the intention, and I will go with that. The following ... `may` not ....; for me, implies the possibility that it might not happen

Reviewer: In this context "may" means "disallowed". But I'm fine with "must", too.

Author: Actually yes, you are correct, re-read and agree

==== Noncompliant code example

[source,cpp,diff-type=noncompliant,diff-id=3]
----
struct S {
  static inline int data = 64;
};

void fun() {
  static int x = 8;
  // ...
  free(&x); // Noncompliant: memory part of the program's data.
  free(&S::data); // Noncompliant: memory part of the program's data.
}
----

==== Compliant solution

[source,cpp,diff-type=compliant,diff-id=3]
----
struct S {
  static inline int data = 64;
};

void fun() {
  static int x = 8;
  // ...
  // Compliant: globals and static variables are released at the end of the program's execution.
}
----

Read-only program data:

==== Noncompliant code example

[source,cpp,diff-type=noncompliant,diff-id=4]
----
int const limit = 128;

void fun() {
  char* name = "string";
  // ...
  free((void*)&limit); // Noncompliant: memory part of program's read-only data.
  free(name); // Noncompliant: memory part of read-only program data.
}
----

==== Compliant solution

[source,cpp,diff-type=compliant,diff-id=4]
----
int const limit = 128;

void fun() {
  char const* name = "string";
  // ...
  // Compliant: read-only program data is freed at the end of the program's execution.
}
----

=== Going the extra mile

> Freeing stack memory usually happens if the origin of the memory held by a pointer is mixed.

Reviewer: How about simplifying this a bit like in:
```suggestion
The accidental release of non-heap memory usually occurs in practice if the same pointer variable is used to once reference heap and once non-heap memory.
This may lead to confusion and should be avoided.
```

> Freeing stack memory usually happens if the origin of the memory held by a pointer is mixed.

Author: Used "origin of the memory held by a pointer is mixed." since I want to avoid "origin of the memory pointed at by a pointer". Please indicate if you see a better way to phrase this

Specifically if the same pointer is used to reference heap and non-heap memory.

> This can happen

Reviewer: ```suggestion

```

Author: Whoops

> To avoid this, follow these best practices:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
These best practices help to avoid accidentally releasing non-heap memory:
```

> * If accessing different memory types, different pointers should be used.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* If accessing different memory types, use different pointer variables.
```

> * When passing non-heap memory address to a function, ensure that the function does not attempt to release the memory.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* When passing non-heap memory addresses to functions, ensure that the functions do not attempt to release the memory.
```

* If manually managing dynamic memory, release it in the same scope where it was acquired.

The following example illustrates the usage of different pointers:

> Noncompliant code example

Reviewer: I would either make these subsections of this very section or use short sentences to briefly explain what the respective code snippet shows. For instance,
```
The following piece of code shows a situation in which the same pointer variable is used to hold a stack or heap address, which leads to a situation in which heap memory is accidentally released.
```
I would prefer the later option, but leave the decision up to you.

Author: Strongly agree with describing more in detail, tracks better to comments (and edit those a bit)

Reviewer: Did you already address this, @LoghinVladDev?
If I'm not mistaken, you elaborated on the code comments. In that case, use the appropriate number of `=` to make the `Noncompliant code example` and `Compliant solution` (sub)section headers.

Author: Oh, I completely missed this, as in, the `==== Compliant ....` formatting you were referring to.

I did not add the `====` since Noncompliant/compliant appears only in How to fix it as subheaders, not in the Going the extra mile section.

I will check if `====` is allowed (if CI formatting check passes)

Author: Update: yep, CI tooling fails with ==== inside Going the Extra Mile

  } else {
    usedString = (char*)malloc(length + 1);
  }
  // ...
  free(usedString); // Noncompliant: if length < 31, the freed memory will be located on the stack.
}
----

Compliant solution

[source,cpp,diff-type=compliant,diff-id=5]
----
void fun(int length) {
  static char smallString[32];
  char* stackOrHeapString;
  char* heapString = nullptr;

  if (length < 31) {
    stackOrHeapString = smallString;
  } else {
    heapString = (char*)malloc(length + 1);
    stackOrHeapString = heapString;
  }
  // ...
  free(heapString); // Compliant: only the heap string will be freed if allocated.
}
----

The following example illustrates a case of passing a mixed pointer to an unsafe function:

Noncompliant code example

[source,cpp,diff-type=noncompliant,diff-id=6]
----
void use(char* string) {
  // ...
  free(string); // Noncompliant: pointer's origin is unknown. If non-heap, the program will crash.
}

void fun(int length) {
  static char smallString[32];
  char* usedString;

  if (length < 31) {
    usedString = smallString; // Pointer to stack memory assigned here
  } else {
    usedString = (char*)malloc(length + 1);
  }

>   useAndClear(usedString); // If length < 31, the unsafe memory will free memory located on the stack.

Reviewer: `useAndClear` is not defined here.

Author: addressed

Explicitly releasing non-heap memory leads to undefined behavior.

== Why is this an issue?

The `free` function and `delete` operator are used exclusively to release dynamically allocated memory.
Attempting to release any other type of memory is _undefined behavior_.

The following non-heap memory types may not be released:

* Stack allocated memory - local variables or memory allocated with the `alloca`, `_alloca`, `_malloca` and `__builtin_alloca` functions.
* Executable program code - function pointers.
* Program data - global and static variables.
* Read-only program data - constants and strings.

=== What is the potential impact

> 

Author: I truly believe github should include some "10 lines above/10 lines below" for the suggestions as well, I stared a bit at the suggestion :laughing:. 

Regardless, is this not repeating the same stated concept at line 6 - "Attempting to release any other type of memory is _undefined behavior_?

> 

Reviewer: That's fine. For most, if not all, of the other rules, we also give a very quick repetition/summary of what goes wrong "IF ..." as an introduction, and then elaborate on what that means for the program and explain the consequences.

> 

Author: I truly want to be able to have in-rule links, and have line 6 UB be a link to "potential impact" UB, so we don't have to second guess clarity, since I'm really 50-50 repeats like these, and I balanced the scales with your opinion

== How to fix it

Remove any calls to `free` or `delete` that aim at releasing non-heap memory.

=== Code examples

Stack allocated memory:

==== Noncompliant code example

[source,cpp,diff-type=noncompliant,diff-id=1]
----
void fun(int size) {
  int number = 0;
  char* name = (char*)alloca(size);
  // ...
  delete &number; // Noncompliant: memory is stack-allocated.
  free(name); // Noncompliant: memory is stack-allocated.
}
----

==== Compliant solution

[source,cpp,diff-type=compliant,diff-id=1]
----
void fun(int size) {
  int number = 0;
  char* name = (char*)alloca(size);
  // ...
  // Compliant: stack memory is automatically released at the end of the function.
}
----

Program executable code:

==== Noncompliant code example

[source,cpp,diff-type=noncompliant,diff-id=2]
----
int getValue() {
  return 10;
}

void fun() {
  // ...
  free((void*) &getValue); // Noncompliant: memory is part of executable code.
}
----

==== Compliant solution

[source,cpp,diff-type=compliant,diff-id=2]
----
int get10() {
  return 10;
}

void fun() {
  // ...

>   // Compliant: program code will be released at the end of the program's execution.

Author: Didn't think of that, that's a great suggestion

On top of this chain, a stack allocated buffer is introduced, leading to a call to `free` of stack memory.

Noncompliant code example

[source,cpp,diff-type=noncompliant,diff-id=6]
----
void use(char* string) {
  // ...
  free(string); // Noncompliant: pointer's origin is unknown. If non-heap, the program will crash.
}

void fun(int length) {
  static char smallString[32];
  char* usedString;

  if (length < 31) {
    usedString = smallString; // Pointer to stack memory assigned here
  } else {
    usedString = (char*)malloc(length + 1);
  }
  use(usedString); // If length < 31, the unsafe memory will free memory located on the stack.
}
----

Compliant solution

[source,cpp,diff-type=compliant,diff-id=6]
----
void use(char* string) {
  // ...
  // Compliant: memory no longer freed in the called function
}

void fun(int length) {
  static char smallString[32];
  if (length < 31) {
    use(smallString);
  } else {
    heapString = (char*)malloc(length + 1);
    use(heapString);
    free(heapString); // Compliant: memory released in the scope it was acquired in.
  }
}
----

> 

Reviewer: Do we have some materials concerning undefined behavior, for instance, that we could link here?

Author: No materials of UB caused by stack free found, only crashes.

Reviewer: Ok. Leaving this blank should be fine, then.
